    Design Guidance
Terminology – Elaboration


            Thursday, 5 July 2007
                  Version 1.0.0.0


                      Prepared by
                       Microsoft
                                                                                                                                                         Microsoft




This document and/or software (“this Content”) has been created in partnership with the National Health Service (NHS) in England. Intellectual Property Rights
to this Content are jointly owned by Microsoft and the NHS in England, although both Microsoft and the NHS are entitled to independently exercise their rights of
ownership. Microsoft acknowledges the contribution of the NHS in England through their Common User Interface programme to this Content. Readers are
referred to www.cui.nhs.uk for further information on the NHS CUI Programme.

All trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Microsoft and Windows are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in
the United States and/or other countries.
© Microsoft Corporation 2007. All rights reserved.

                                                                                                                                                           Page ii
                                    Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                    Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                    Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                                                     Microsoft




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1    Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 1
    1.1    Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 1
    1.2    Area of Focus ................................................................................................................................. 3

2    Recommendation and Guidance ........................................................................................................ 5
    2.1    Elaboration with Free Text .............................................................................................................. 7
     2.1.1      Additional Text........................................................................................................................... 8
     2.1.2      Text Remaining Unstructured ................................................................................................. 10
    2.2    Elaboration with SNOMED-CT Attributes ..................................................................................... 15
     2.2.1      Matching SNOMED-CT Attributes Within Additional Free Text .............................................. 15
     2.2.2      Warning of Important Unconfirmed Elaboration ...................................................................... 19
     2.2.3      Mandatory SNOMED-CT Qualification ................................................................................... 21
    2.3    Elaboration with Additional Values ............................................................................................... 26
     2.3.1      Identifying Values Within Text ................................................................................................. 27
     2.3.2      Templates ................................................................................................................................ 29

3    Document Information ...................................................................................................................... 34
    3.1    Terms and Abbreviations .............................................................................................................. 34
    3.2    Definitions ..................................................................................................................................... 34
    3.3    Nomenclature ............................................................................................................................... 34
     3.3.1      Body Text ................................................................................................................................ 34
     3.3.2      Cross References.................................................................................................................... 35
    3.4    References ................................................................................................................................... 35




                                                                                                                                                       Page iii
                                 Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                 Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                 Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                         Microsoft




1            INTRODUCTION
    This document provides guidance and recommendations with rationale for aspects of Terminology user
    interfaces related to Terminology Elaboration.
    This document should be read in conjunction with the following Design Guidance:
           Design Guidance – Terminology – Matching {R1}
           Design Guidance – Terminology – Display Standards for Coded Information {R2}

1.1          Overview
    This document is for anyone whose role includes screen design, implementation or assessment of a
    clinical application, and who is involved in creating or evaluating terminology user interfaces.
    Terminology user interfaces operate within a note-taking environment. These environments fall into
    three categories (as illustrated in Figure 1 and described below), each of which requires different
    guidance:
           Forms
                  The user makes notes by selecting boxes and choosing options, not by entering text.
                  An encoding interface is not needed. The clinical codes should be embedded within the
                   form itself or derived from combinations of entries in the form.
           Single concept matching
                  The user makes notes by typing the note for a single concept (such as 'asthma'), and the
                                                  1
                   system returns SNOMED-CT® {R3} matches. The user can then choose an appropriate
                   match, refine the concept, then elaborate it with a combination of free text, qualifying
                   SNOMED-CT attributes (such as 'severe'), and numerical values.
                  Encoding interfaces require components to match and elaborate SNOMED-CT concepts.
           Text parser matching
                  The user makes notes by writing unconstrained text, while the system matches words and
                   phrases against the SNOMED-CT database, or a constrained subset of the database, and
                   displays the matches. The user then has the option to do one of the following:
                      Confirm that they want to encode these SNOMED-CT expressions
                      Browse alternative matches
                      Refine a selected match
                      Leave the note un-encoded, in which case it will be saved as unstructured text rather
                       than as a SNOMED-CT expression
                  Encoding interfaces require components to identify and match SNOMED-CT concepts, as
                   well as build post-coordinated SNOMED-CT expressions, based upon attribute
                   relationships, from within the text. The interface must also be able to identify terms and
                   relationships from additional informational models in order to support accurate and
                   comprehensive clinical noting.


    1
        SNOMED-CT: http://www.snomed.org/
                                                                                                          Page 1
                             Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                             Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                             Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                        Microsoft



Figure 1 illustrates forms (left), single concept matching (centre) and text parser matching (right).




          The user enters key                                                          As the user types in
          words and the system                                                         notes, the system
          returns matches, which                                                       suggests SNOMED-CT
          the user can elaborate.                                                      matches.


Figure 1: Styles of Encoding

A possible fourth hybrid category could be defined where forms may include areas where single
concept matching or text parser is used.
Medical language is full of abbreviations and jargon, some of which have more than one meaning. By
encoding clinical statements, they can be shared unambiguously. This should improve patient safety by
reducing confusion, or errors, due to ambiguity in clinical notes.
Encoding also opens up important opportunities, such as:
      Filtering context specific views of medical records in order to improve searching
      Unambiguously sharing clinical statements between clinicians in different disciplines or
       institutions
      Using decision support mechanisms, based on codes within clinical statements, to enhance
       patient safety
      Auditing clinical activity by using codes to locate and report on specific types of information
       within patient records
      Researching clinical practice or outcomes by extracting codes from electronic patient records
SNOMED-CT is used in this Design Guidance as the terminology for encoding clinical statements.




                                                                                                         Page 2
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                       Microsoft




1.2    Area of Focus
 This document describes the elaboration of a SNOMED-CT expression, which could be a single
 pre-coordinated or post-coordinated expression comprising multiple concepts. Often, encoding an
 individual SNOMED-CT expression on its own will not provide sufficient meaning to match what the
 clinician wishes to express. In these cases, the concept requires some elaboration.
 Elaboration could be as simple as adding some unstructured text to the expression to give the
 expression further meaning. Obviously the scope for future data manipulation is limited with free text
 elaboration. However, in order to give the clinician the freedom and flexibility to express their notes in a
 comprehensive and accurate manner, this type of elaboration is essential. Free text elaboration could
 be achieved by finding a SNOMED-CT expression and adding text to it (as in a single concept
 matching approach). Alternatively it could be done by matching a SNOMED-CT expression from within
 a passage of text, and leaving some of the text itself un-encoded, but at the same time associated with
 the encoded expression. The current Design Guidance deals with the former, for the latter see Design
 Guidance – Terminology – Matching {R1}.
 Another type of elaboration involves post-coordinating a SNOMED-CT attribute (such as a qualifier)
 with the selected SNOMED-CT expression. This could be done by the system offering the user certain
 SNOMED-CT qualifiers to add to the selected expression. As we shall indicate, this should be limited to
 instances where this qualification is mandatory. This type of elaboration could also be achieved by the
 user typing in further notes for a selected SNOMED-CT expression, and the system offering
 SNOMED-CT matches that coordinate with the expression from within these notes.
 Examples of common qualifiers include the attribute ‘Severity’, which has values such as ‘Severe’,
 ‘Mild’ and ‘Moderate’. An example of potential mandatory attribute could be ‘Laterality’, of which the
 common values are ‘Left’ and ‘Right’, and which would apply to any relevant body structure concept.
 All attribute relationships should be conformant with the published Context Model, and ideally further
 constrained appropriate (that is, sensible) sanctioning. Conforming to sanctioned relationships should
 optimise system behaviour.
 A third type of elaboration involves the user adding or selecting numerical (or date and time) values for
 a SNOMED-CT expression. Given the importance of numerical values (such as measurements and
 timings) to clinical noting, the system must give the user every opportunity to record these values in
 their notes, and must sometimes actively encourage users to add these values. These values, and
 their relationships with SNOMED-CT expressions, are not modelled in the SNOMED-CT terminology,
 and will rely on an additional informational model of clinical statements. These may be expressions of
 time, such as ‘for 3 days’, or quantities plus their units, such as ‘42 mmol/l’ for blood sugar level.




                                                                                                        Page 3
                       Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                       Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                       Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                           Microsoft




The area of elaboration is highlighted in the User Interaction Model, shown in Figure 2.




Figure 2: User Interaction Model




                                                                                            Page 4
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                      Microsoft




2         RECOMMENDATION AND GUIDANCE
    Despite the wide scope of the terminology, individual SNOMED-CT concepts on their own will often not
    be sufficient to accurately and comprehensively reflect the encounter which the clinician is trying to
    express. There are three main areas that are covered in this guidance:
        Elaboration with free text
        Elaboration with SNOMED-CT attributes
        Elaboration with additional values
    The first area concerns adding unstructured free text to a note, in order to give the SNOMED-CT
    concept a more qualified and accurate meaning.
    The second area requires a form of ‘post-coordination’, or joining together, of existing SNOMED-CT
    concepts, in order to express a synthesised meaning. In the Design Guidance, we explore, in
    particular, where post-coordination is used to qualify or contextualise a given concept.
    The third area involves adding structured data and relationships that will often need to be modelled
    outside of the SNOMED-CT terminology.

    Notional Clinical Record
    The guidance outlined in this Design Guidance is based upon assumptions about the composition of a
    clinical record. We assume in our ‘notional clinical record’ that the following rules will apply.
    A single clinical record may comprise one or more ‘notes’ plus some contextual information, such as a
    heading (for example, ’past medical history’).
    A note will comprise of one of these:
        A pre-coordinated SNOMED-CT expression
        A post-coordinated SNOMED-CT expression
        A free text (non-SNOMED-CT) expression
    In addition, each of these SNOMED-CT expressions may have a set of appropriate axis modifiers
    associated with it. These values may be:
        Default values
        User selected values
    In addition each of the SNOMED-CT expressions may have the following associated with it:
        Non-SNOMED-CT numerical or time values, for example, reading measurements
        Free text
    We will not allow:
        Numerical values to be recorded as values rather than free text if they are not associated with
         an encoded SNOMED-CT expression
        More than one expression to be saved, except in those instances where multiple concepts
         comprise a single ‘composite’




                                                                                                       Page 5
                         Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                         Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                         Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                   Microsoft




Within each record entry there may be multiple ‘notes’, each of which comprise combinations of a
SNOMED-CT expression, numerical/time values and free text. See Figure 3 and Figure 4.




Figure 3: Structure of Notional Clinical Record Entry




Figure 4: Example of Notional Clinical Record Entry Structure




                                                                                                    Page 6
                                Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                   Microsoft




2.1       Elaboration with Free Text
 Despite the range and depth of SNOMED-CT, there may be many instances where expressing the
 specific nuance of what the clinician wants to say cannot be done by only encoding SNOMED-CT
 concepts. Also, the conceptual relationships required to articulate a statement may be lacking in the
 released SNOMED-CT data and may not be covered by additional information models at the system’s
 disposal. In these cases, the clinician may want to choose a SNOMED-CT concept and elaborate it
 with ‘free’ text; that is, text that remains un-encoded at the point of saving the record. This might
 include non-clinical information, such as indicating the professions of a patient’s parents.
 Unstructured free text can be associated with a SNOMED-CT expression in both the single concept
 matching and text parser matching approaches.
 As outlined in Figure 5, there are a number of functional areas in the standard ‘encoding dialog’, which
 is used in both the single concept matching and text parser matching approaches.




 Figure 5: Functional Areas of Encoding Dialog




                                                                                                     Page 7
                                Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                             Microsoft




2.1.1            Additional Text
  In the single concept matching approach, the user is presented with a text input field, labelled
  ‘Additional text’. In addition to selecting a SNOMED-CT concept match, they may also type in free
  unstructured text, which will be associated with the concept. The additional text input field is featured
  within the encoding dialog, immediately below the list of SNOMED-CT matches.
  The user selects the best match from the list of possible matches, and then types the free text into the
  additional text field, as illustrated in Figure 6 and Figure 7.




  Figure 6: Selecting a Concept Match




                                                                         Once the user has chosen a concept match, an
                                                                         ‘additional text’ box appears, into which the user may
                                                                         type elaborating text.



  Figure 7: Entering Additional Text to Elaborate the Concept

2.1.1.1            Guidance
  The system:
        Must allow the user to add free, unstructured text to a SNOMED-CT match selection
                  Must appropriately label the input field for adding free unstructured text
                  Should locate the additional text field in a position that is visible to the user when they are
                   viewing the SNOMED-CT matches




                                                                                                                                  Page 8
                                 Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                 Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                 Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                                             Microsoft




2.1.1.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                           Example                                    Comments

           Align the additional text field with the     See Figure 5                               This should allow the user to scan down
            field displaying the list of matches                                                    to the additional text field easily

           Provide an additional text field for all     See Figure 7                               This is a universal feature that could
            definition/elaboration dialogs in the                                                   apply to all concepts
            ‘Code and Elaborate’ environment

           Retain the additional text until the user    n/a                                        Although text notes may apply to one
            selects a code or closes the search                                                     concept, but not to another, users may
            dialog                                                                                  be writing a lot of notes and using a
                                                                                                    concept as a ‘hook’ to hang the notes
                                                                                                    onto. Therefore, they will want the
                                                                                                    system to retain the unstructured text
                                                                                                    even if they change concept
  Table 1: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.1.1.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                           Example                                    Comments

           Do not locate the additional text field in
            the flyout area

           Do not allow users to apply their own        Users should not be able to apply          Additional formatting would obstruct the
            formatting to text in the additional text    styles, such as bold, or highlighting to   communication of confirmed or
            field                                        text in the additional text field          encodable text

           Do not provide an additional text field      n/a                                        It would be confusing to offer two places
            for the ‘text parser’ approach to                                                       to add unstructured text notes
            encoding
  Table 2: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.1.1.4           Benefits and Rationale
  In the single concept matching approach, the additional text field must be located close to the matches
  list (and therefore, the selected SNOMED-CT match to which the elaboration will apply).
  We had looked at featuring the additional text field in the flyout which, when tested, was understood.
  However, locating it in the flyout can appear strange, especially when the flyout is moving as the
  mouse moves down the list.
  Featuring the additional text field in the same area as the list of matches does require an additional
  user action, namely single-clicking on the desired SNOMED-CT match (which turns the highlight grey)
  before clicking in the additional text field to write elaboration text. Alternatively, the user may write the
  text before selecting the list item, if they wish. However, despite a possible additional user action, it
  does make the process clearer.
  Featuring the additional text below the selected match communicates that the text belongs to the
  match, and is an elaboration of the match. It also follows the more typical task order, which would be to
  select a match and then elaborate it.



                                                                                                                                              Page 9
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                             Microsoft




2.1.1.5           Confidence Level

  High
        Must allow the user to add free, unstructured text to a SNOMED-CT match selection
                 Must appropriately label the input field for adding free unstructured text
                 Should locate the additional text field in a position that is visible to the user when they are
                  viewing the SNOMED-CT matches

2.1.2            Text Remaining Unstructured
  In the text parser approach to matching, free text can be associated with a SNOMED-CT expression by
  not encoding text that falls within the expression envelope marquee. This may be the user’s choice not
  to confirm a potential match for encoding (that is, by not selecting the appropriate check box), or it
  might be because the text cannot be matched with SNOMED-CT concepts (or data from additional
  information modelling).
  In the example shown in Figure 8 (below), the user has typed in ‘Unable to grip properly’, from which
  the system has matched the concept ‘Unable to grip’ (ConceptID 284258001). The remaining text
  cannot be matched, but still falls within the user defined expression envelope (there are no full stops or
  carriage returns between ‘Unable to grip’ and ‘properly’) and the system has not associated the text
  ‘properly’ with any other matched concepts.
  The text ‘properly’ appears in the suggested matching area, indented to the SNOMED-CT concept. It
  also features a special icon (currently undefined, but in this example, a ‘pencil’ icon has been shown) to
  distinguish it from the potential SNOMED-CT matches. Any free text will be displayed in this position
  (that is, below and indented to the SNOMED-CT expression).
  If the free text is divided into two separate strings, these will be displayed as two bullets (that is, they
  would comprise two separate lines, each with an icon). For example, if the user had typed in ‘David
  unable to grip properly’, the system would display the concept match ‘Unable to grip’ and below this it
  would feature one line containing the text ‘David’ and another line containing the text ‘properly’.




  Figure 8: System Matching the Concept: Unable to Grip


                                                                                                             Page 10
                                Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                   Microsoft



If the user clicks on a suggested match label, the system will display the associated free text below the
list of matches, again with the special icon, as shown in Figure 9. This is in the same position as the
additional text field in the single concept matching approach.




Figure 9: Clicking a Match Label to Use the Encoding Dialog

If the user does not want the free text to be associated with the SNOMED-CT expression, they can
either delete the text from the note altogether or they can adjust the marquee boundaries by dragging
the appropriate yellow handle with the mouse. As shown in Figure 10, when the user moves the mouse
over one of the yellow marquee handles, two directional arrows appear on the handle to further
communicate to the user that they can drag the handle. When the user has dragged the handle so that
the marquee no longer contains the text ‘properly’, the text disappears from the suggested match area.
The text ‘properly’ would then have its own marquee.




Figure 10: Adjusting the Expression Envelope (Marquee) Boundaries



                                                                                                    Page 11
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                        Microsoft



  Conversely, the user may also drag the boundary handles so that they include text that was not
  previously associated with a matched expression. The user, for example, may want to associate
  multiple sentences with a single matched expression.

2.1.2.1       Guidance
  The system:
      Must allow the user to associate free text with SNOMED-CT expressions in the text parser
       approach to matching
      Must define ‘free text’ as any text that cannot be matched, either with a SNOMED-CT
       expression or another modelled expression (such as expressions of time or measurement
       readings)
      Must assume that free text is associated with a SNOMED-CT expression if it falls within the
       ‘expression envelope’, which itself is defined by (i) proximity, that is, if the text is immediately
       adjacent to the SNOMED-CT matched text, and by (ii) user-defined boundaries, such as full
       stops and carriage returns
      Should display the free text in the same area as the suggested match in the left-hand
       confirmation pane
             Must distinguish the free text from the matched text
                 Could feature an icon to communicate that it is free text, rather than matched text
                 Could indent the free text and display it below the matched text, to show that the free
                  text ‘belongs’ to the matched expression
      Should allow the user to read the free text while they are viewing the possible SNOMED-CT
       matches
             Should display the free text below the list of possible SNOMED-CT matches
      Must allow the user to ‘un-associate’ the free text from the matched expression
             Should allow the user to delete the free text
             Should allow the user to manipulate the expression envelope boundaries, in order to move
              the free text outside of the expression envelope, and thus disassociate it from the matched
              expression
             Should, conversely, allow the user to associate free text with a matched expression by
              manipulating the marquee boundaries, that is, dragging the boundaries so that they include
              text that was not already in the expression envelope




                                                                                                        Page 12
                       Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                       Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                       Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                                      Microsoft




2.1.2.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           Must feature an appropriate icon next to We have shown a pencil icon, but we
            the free text in the suggested match     believe a better icon can be created
            area

           Provide an appropriate ToolTip that   Drag the handles to include or exclude
            appears when the user moves the       text in the expression”
            mouse over the handles of the marquee
            boundaries
  Table 3: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.1.2.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           In the text parser approach to matching, Providing an additional text field in the   In the text parser approach to matching,
            allowing users to edit additional text   encoding dialog in the text parser          the user must only be able to edit
            anywhere but in the text input area      approach.                                   additional text in one area, otherwise
                                                                                                 the interaction may become confusing.
  Table 4: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.1.2.4           Benefits and Rationale
  The approach outlined in this guidance is a very natural and unobtrusive way of allowing the user to
  associate free text elaboration with SNOMED-CT concepts. In fact, the user is doing what they would
  do anyway: writing their notes in sentences. As the sentences commonly define the expression
  envelopes and, in many cases, sentences are self-contained units of meaning, this approach does not
  require the user to do any unnatural action to associate this text (in most cases).
  Where the user needs to associate free text that sits outside of the expression window, they must
  stretch the marquee around this additional text. Again, the notion of stretching a marquee around
  objects that one wants to include in the marquee is an intuitive action, akin to encircling notes that
  belong together. Clinicians confirmed that this approach is clear and understandable in usability
  testing. The mouse-over arrows (and ToolTip) reinforce the communication of this action.
  However, there are a few open issues that remain with this parsing approach. For example, the
  clinician may enter a contextual modifier that applies to more than one expression, as in the note
  “Father has suffered heart failure. He also has arthritis”. In this example, the modifier ‘Father’ should
  apply to both the expression of ‘heart failure’ and ‘arthritis’. Under certain contextual headings (see
  Design Guidance –Terminology – Matching {R1} for details of contextual headings), the system could
  apply the modifier to all subsequent expressions until the user enters another modifier. Further rules
  may need to be developed and tested to overcome these specific issues.




                                                                                                                                      Page 13
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                       Microsoft




2.1.2.5      Confidence Level

  High
      Must allow the user to associate free text with SNOMED-CT expressions in the text parser
       approach to matching
      Must define ‘free text’ as any text that cannot be matched, either with a SNOMED-CT
       expression or another modelled expression (such as expressions of time or measurement
       readings)
      Should display the free text in the same area as the suggested match in the left-hand
       confirmation pane
      Must distinguish the free text from the matched text
      Could feature an icon to communicate that it is free text, rather than matched text
      Could indent the free text and display it below the matched text, to show that the free text
       ‘belongs’ to the matched expression
      Should allow the user to delete the free text

  Medium
      Must assume that free text is associated with a SNOMED-CT expression if it falls within the
       ‘expression envelope’, which itself is defined by (i) proximity, that is, if the text is immediately
       adjacent to the SNOMED-CT matched text, and by (ii) user-defined boundaries, such as full
       stops and carriage returns
      Must allow the user to ‘un-associate’ the free text from the matched expression
      Should allow the user to manipulate the expression envelope boundaries, in order to move the
       free text outside of the expression envelope, and thus disassociate it from the matched
       expression
      Should, conversely, allow the user to associate free text with a matched expression by
       manipulating the marquee boundaries, that is, dragging the boundaries so that they include text
       that was not already in the expression envelope

  Low
      Should allow the user to read the free text while they are viewing the possible SNOMED-CT
       matches
      Should display the free text below the list of possible SNOMED-CT matches




                                                                                                        Page 14
                       Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                       Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                       Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                        Microsoft




2.2       Elaboration with SNOMED-CT Attributes
 The requirement for additional elaboration may arise because, on its own, the concept is missing some
 important qualification. For example, a diagnosis of ‘gastroenteritis’ could have different implications,
 depending upon the suspected severity of the disorder. The clinician may want to qualify this
 diagnosed disorder as being ‘mild’. Likewise, the clinician may want to specify that a patient’s asthma
 is ‘on-going’ rather than being a new episode.
 As with other areas of the Terminology UI, the design primarily adopts a user-led approach. That is to
 say, the user gets what they enter. This principle applies for most qualifier attributes in this design. The
 user will only be offered matches for qualifier attributes that they have typed in themselves. This will
 apply to both the single concept matching approach and the text parser matching approach.
 This document will focus on how the user may add qualifiers to a SNOMED-CT match using the single
 concept matching approach.
 One exception to this ‘user-led’ principle of qualifier matching is when attributes are deemed
 ‘mandatory’, or are at least strongly recommended. A plausible example is laterality. This could apply
 to a body structure or a procedure that is defined in part by a body structure. In these situations, many
 clinical organisations will require the user to enter the laterality at the point of encoding. In this case,
 the system will actively offer the selection choices to the user, bearing in mind that ‘Not specified’ and
 ‘Both’ are both legitimate choices.

2.2.1        Matching SNOMED-CT Attributes Within Additional Free Text
 In the single concept matching approach, the user may need to add structured qualification to a
 SNOMED-CT concept. This is especially important if the user is offered a field for free text entry, as
 there will be a temptation to qualify the matched concept with free text, and some of this free text
 qualification could be very important to the meaning of the note.
 Therefore, the design matches attributes from within the free text, in a similar manner to the text parser
 approach. Unlike the text parser approach, the user can only enter one expression at a time, although
 the expression could comprise a SNOMED-CT concept plus multiple qualifiers.
 In the example shown in Figure 11, the user has found matches for the word ‘asthma’ and selects the
 concept ‘Asthma’, by a single click. They then click in the additional text input field, and start typing
 some additional qualifying text.




 Figure 11: Selecting a SNOMED-CT Match Using a Single Click

                                                                                                        Page 15
                              Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                              Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                              Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                     Microsoft



As the user is typing in the additional text, the system is matching individual words (or strings of words)
against SNOMED-CT attributes for the concept ‘Asthma’. When it identifies a match, it highlights it in
blue and displays the match above the additional text field, along with a check box for the user to
confirm the match, as shown in Figure 12.



                                                                               The system matches
                                                                               the attribute ‘Mild’ from
                                                                               the additional text.




Figure 12: System Identifying a Match from Additional Qualifying Text

As the user moves the mouse over the label ‘Mild’, the area around it changes colour to signify that it is
clickable, as shown in Figure 13.




                                                                             The user moves the mouse over the
                                                                             attribute match label, which causes it to
                                                                             turn orange and ‘clickable’.




Figure 13: Label Changing Colour on Hover




                                                                                                                         Page 16
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                              Microsoft



  The user clicks on the label to reveal other possible attribute matches for the word ‘Mild’, but decides
  that the top selection is the best match as shown in Figure 14.

                                                                                   Clicking on the attribute match opens up
                                                                                   a list of possible matches. In this case,
                                                                                   there is only one match.




  Figure 14: Displaying Possible Matches after Clicking on the Label

  The user then selects the check box, and the attribute match becomes confirmed for encoding upon
  saving the note to record as shown in Figure 15.




                                                                               Having selected the confirmation check
                                                                               box, the match becomes bold (and
                                                                               highlighted in grey in the ‘Additional text’
                                                                               input field).




  Figure 15: Additional Text after Selecting the Check Box

2.2.1.1            Guidance
  The system:
        Must allow the user to type in notes that the system can match against SNOMED-CT matches
         that have attribute relationships with the selected SNOMED-CT concept, which are defined by
         the Concept Model (which specifies allowable relationships, including those in the Context
         Model) or an external information model.
                  Should make the noting clear and efficient by using the same field for both the additional
                   text and the input for attributes
                  Should re-use the mechanisms for matching the text parser, namely: highlighting, bolding,
                   featuring a confirmation check box, and featuring a control for viewing alternative matches




                                                                                                                              Page 17
                                 Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                 Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                 Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                               Microsoft



       Note
       Relationships needed for clinical noting are defined by an external information model which does not exist in
       the SCT, Concept or Context Models. An example would be the relationships between measurement values
       (that is, quantity and unit values) and the appropriate SNOMED-CT concepts.


2.2.1.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           Allow the matching of multiple concepts, The system could match ‘Severe’ and
            if they are all attributes of the base-  ‘Sudden onset’ when the base-concept
            concept                                  is ‘Asthma’

           Allow users to browse related concepts     The user may wish to see what other
            of an attribute                            levels of severity there are to choose
                                                       from
  Table 5: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.2.1.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           Matching concepts that are not             Matching the concept ‘Foot’ if the user
            attributes of the base-concept (which is   has selected the concept ‘Fever’ in the
            selected in the main list of matches)      list above
  Table 6: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.2.1.4           Benefits and Rationale
  This approach is a good example of the user-led principle of elaboration or, in other words, the user will
  type in what they want up-front.
  Previous designs which featured a few elaboration settings displayed in drop-down list boxes in the
  flyout confused users who did not understand why these settings were being offered to them. They
  wondered why they were being offered selections for severity or episodicity, but not for other ways of
  adding description to the concept. Also, some users thought that they must select from the fields if they
  were being offered to them, which was incorrect and could lead to a lot of unnecessary encoding.
  The display of lists of options that naturally belong in a logical order, but which are unordered in the
  SNOMED-CT database, can be confusing and misleading if they are left unordered. For example, in a
  list of severity ratings, the user would expect them to be arranged in a list of increasing or decreasing
  severity. However, the metadata to order these concepts in a meaningful way has not been created.
  The user-led approach removes the need for such metadata in this instance.
  Consistent use of highlighting and matching labels with the text parser approach to matching will
  reduce the need for learning between the two approaches. The benefits and rationale for these
  mechanisms are covered in detail in the relevant sections of the following documents:
        Design Guidance – Terminology – Matching {R1}
        Design Guidance – Terminology – Display Standards for Coded Information {R2}




                                                                                                                Page 18
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                          Microsoft




2.2.1.5            Confidence Level

  Low
        Must allow the user to type in notes that the system can match against SNOMED-CT matches
         that have attribute relationships with the selected SNOMED-CT concept
                  Should make the noting clear and efficient by using the same field for both the additional
                   text and the input for attributes
                  Should re-use the mechanisms for matching the text parser, namely: highlighting, bolding,
                   featuring a confirmation check box, and featuring a control for viewing alternative matches
  We have not tested the use of the additional text field in this way.

2.2.2            Warning of Important Unconfirmed Elaboration
  If users are allowed to type in free text, the system must identify important words that can modify the
  meaning of the concept. If the user has typed in a word in the additional text field that is recognised to
  be an axis modifier, such as negation or a relation to the patient (meaning that the other family member
  is suffering from the disorder rather than the patient themselves), the system may offer this to the user
  in the same way as for the qualifier, namely with a highlight and a check box.
  However, if the user fails to confirm the encoding of this axis modifier, the system should warn the user
  that they have not done so, and offer them a quick control to confirm it.
  In the example shown in Figure 16, the user has typed that the patient’s mother had asthma. The
  clinician could be trying to communicate that both the user and their mother have asthma, or they could
  mean that only the patient’s mother is known to have asthma.




  Figure 16: Presenting a Control for Confirming an Axis Modifier in Additional Text for Encoding




                                                                                                          Page 19
                                  Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                  Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                  Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                            Microsoft



  When the user tries to save the note by clicking ‘OK’, the system displays a warning, as shown in
  Figure 17, that they have not confirmed that it is the patient’s mother and not necessarily the patient
  that has asthma. The system will offer the user the choice of confirming this or leaving the note as it is
  (which has the meaning that the patient has asthma and so does their mother).




                                                                                     The user has tried to save the note
                                                                                     without confirming the axis modifier
                                                                                     match (‘Mother’).




  Figure 17: System Requesting Confirmation of Who Has Asthma

2.2.2.1           Guidance
  The system:
        Must attempt to identify axis modifiers, such as negation, in the additional text notes and
         present them for confirmation in the same way as for the qualifier values
        Must warn the user if they try to save the note without confirming the axis modifier
        Should offer the user a quick control for confirming the axis modifier
       Note
       In order for this approach to work well, the high risk trigger words should be identified in SNOMED-CT itself.


2.2.2.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           Clearly outline the problem and the way See text in Figure 17
            in which the user may resolve the
            problem
  Table 7: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.2.2.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                   Comments

           Present the user with an array of          Do not offer users the choice of ‘Yes’,
            options in the warning message.            ‘No’ and ‘Cancel’
  Table 8: How Not to Use the Design Guidance




                                                                                                                            Page 20
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                           Microsoft




2.2.2.4       Benefits and Rationale
  It is important to alert users to ‘dangerous’ elaboration words that the user may expect the system to
  act on (such as negation). The guidance outlined here allows the user flexibility to type in what they
  want, but forces them to attend to any critical elaboration. Words that match with axis modification
  concepts are particularly dangerous as they fundamentally change the meaning of the expression.
  Qualifier values do not need these warning messages.
  The design allows the user to type in axis modifiers in the text entry fields, but will not present these
  modifiers (even the default ‘soft’ settings of these values) unless the user has typed them in. Previous
  designs featured a fly-out that displayed fields for axis modifier concept values, but users found them
  confusing. For example, featuring the text ‘the patient currently has this finding’ was not understood by
  clinicians.

2.2.2.5       Confidence Level

  High
       Must warn the user if they try to save the note without confirming the axis modifier

  Medium
       Must attempt to identify axis modifiers, such as negation, in the additional text notes and
        present them for confirmation in the same way as for the qualifier values
       Should offer the user a quick control for confirming the axis modifier

2.2.3      Mandatory SNOMED-CT Qualification
  The guidance shows how some qualification could be communicated as mandatory by the user
  interface. The best example of this is laterality, that is, whether a body structure or a procedure or
  finding that is partly defined by a body structure is the left or right instance of that body structure. For
  example, if the user types in ‘Fracture of radius’, it will be important to know whether this refers to the
  patient’s left radius, right radius or both. This has important implications for levels of patient safety.
  In the example shown in Figure 18, the user has selected ‘Fracture of radius’ in the single concept
  matching approach.
  The flyout for the concept contains a drop-down list from which the user must select the laterality of the
  radius, or state that they do not know which side the affected radius is on. The drop-down is coloured
  yellow to grab the user’s attention, and the user cannot click ‘OK’ to save the note until they have
  selected a choice from the drop-down list.
  Please note that if the user has typed laterality into the additional text field and has confirmed the
  match, the drop-down list box will disappear and the ‘OK’ will be enabled.




                                                                                                           Page 21
                        Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                        Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                        Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                                        Microsoft




                                                                                The mandatory field is highlighted in
                                                                                yellow.



Figure 18: Example of a Mandatory Qualifier Field in the Single Concept Matching Approach

The implementation of mandatory qualifier fields also applies to the text parser approach. In the
example shown in Figure 19, the user has typed in ‘Fracture of radius’ and the system has matched
this with the SNOMED-CT concept ‘Fracture of radius’. However, the system does not enable the
check box for confirming the encoding of the phrase. Instead, when the user moves the mouse over
the concept match area, the system displays a warning message, telling the user to specify whether
the radius is on the left, right or both (or unknown).




                                                                                             A message is displayed to warn the user
                                                                                             that they must choose from the
                                                                                             mandatory selection field prior to
                                                                                             confirming the match.

                                                                                             The check box is disabled until the user
                                                                                             has made a selection.




Figure 19: Concept that Requires a Statement of Laterality




                                                                                                                                        Page 22
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                              Microsoft



At this point, the user could add the word ‘left’ (or ‘right’, or ‘both’) in the text input area. Alternatively,
they could click on the match in the left-hand pane, which would reveal the qualifier drop-down list as
illustrated in Figure 20.




Figure 20: Displaying the Field for Selecting Laterality

Selecting the laterality from the list box enables the confirmation check box. Also, at this point, the
background of the qualifier’s drop-down turns from yellow to white as shown in Figure 21.




                                                                                   Selecting from a mandatory
                                                                                   field changes its background
                                                                                   from yellow to white.




Figure 21: Selecting a Qualifier Value, Enabling the Confirmation Checkbox




                                                                                                              Page 23
                                 Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                 Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                 Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                       Microsoft



  Figure 22 shows that when the user confirms the match, the qualifier value is displayed in the match
  and is rendered in the text input area. Please note that the check box for the qualifier value is selected,
  but is disabled to prevent the user from removing the qualifier, but leaving the base concept confirmed.
  If the user wants to change the laterality setting, they must un-confirm the base concept (that is,
  ‘Fracture of radius’) before clicking on it and changing the setting in the match’s flyout.




                                                                           Selecting the check box confirms the
                                                                           match, which emboldens the matches and
                                                                           changes the background/highlight to grey.




  Figure 22: Confirmed Match with Qualifier

2.2.3.1            Guidance
  The system:
        Must disable the control for confirming a match (text parser matching approach) or the control
         for saving the note (single concept matching approach) if there is a mandatory qualifier that
         remains unresolved
        Must provide a control for selecting the mandatory qualifier
                  Could feature a drop-down list box
                  Should associate the control with the individual match
                        Should feature the control in the match’s flyout
        Must communicate to the user that they must select the mandatory qualifier in order to
         confirm/save the note
                  Should feature a warning message in the suggested match area (in the left-hand pane) that
                   appears when the user moves the mouse over the area
                  Should feature the words ‘Please specify’ in the mandatory qualifier selection control
                  Should make the mandatory qualifier selection control sufficiently prominent
                        Could feature the mandatory qualifier selection control in yellow, until the user selects
                         an option from it




                                                                                                                       Page 24
                                 Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                 Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                 Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                               Microsoft




        Must not allow the user to un-confirm the mandatory qualifier value independently from the
         base concept

       Note
       The identification of mandatory elaboration would imply the creation of appropriate metadata.


2.2.3.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                      Comments

           Highlight the mandatory elaboration with See Figure 20
            a bright colour

           Provide a hover-over message that          The message could read “You must
            indicates that the field is mandatory      select from this list to be able to encode
                                                       ‘name of the concept’”

           Feature the text ‘Please specify’ within   See Figure 20
            the initial view of the selection field

           Provide a key that communicates how        See Figure 20
            mandatory fields are displayed
  Table 9: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.2.3.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                         Example                                      Comments

           Do not allow users to encode a term        n/a
            without selecting all its mandatory fields
  Table 10: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.2.3.4           Benefits and Rationale
  Preventing users from encoding a concept without selecting a mandatory field forces the user to select
  it (if they want to encode the concept). A bright background in the mandatory field will grab the user’s
  attention, and the asterisk icon with the key at the foot of the dialog would make it explicit that the field
  is mandatory. This asterisk and footnote will be more important if there are multiple fields in the flyout,
  for example, if there are values to enter
  Another good place to communicate that there are mandatory fields for the user to complete is near to
  the confirmation control in the suggested matches area, as this area is also used to display warning
  messages about similar matches.




                                                                                                               Page 25
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                       Microsoft




2.2.3.5       Confidence Level

  High
       Must provide a control for selecting the mandatory qualifier
             Could feature a drop-down list box
             Should associate the control with the individual match
                 Should feature the control in the match’s flyout
       Must not allow the user to un-confirm the mandatory qualifier value independently from the
        base concept
       Must communicate to the user that they must select the mandatory qualifier in order to
        confirm/save the note

  Medium
       Must disable the control for confirming a match (text parser matching approach) or the control
        for saving the note (single concept matching approach) if there is a mandatory qualifier that
        remains unresolved
       Should feature the words ‘Please specify’ in the mandatory qualifier selection control
       Should make the mandatory qualifier selection control sufficiently prominent
             Could feature the mandatory qualifier selection control in yellow, until the user selects an
              option from it

  Low
             Should feature a warning message in the suggested match area (in the left-hand pane) that
              appears when the user moves the mouse over the area

2.3       Elaboration with Additional Values
  There will be additional values that SNOMED-CT does not contain, but which will be crucial to creating
  a meaningful note. These may be time values, such as months, hours or dates (there are some
  codable dates in SNOMED-CT; the system would need to distinguish expressions of date that are
  codable in SNOMED-CT from those which are not); or values for an observable entity reading, such as
  temperature or blood pressure.
  The system must be able to recognise these values and any specified units from within the user’s
  typed notes, and where there are not appropriate units identified, the system must suggest an
  appropriate default unit. The relationships between the concepts and the value, plus the values
  themselves, must be taken from an external information model if they are not present in SNOMED-CT
  itself.




                                                                                                       Page 26
                       Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                       Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                       Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                      Microsoft




2.3.1        Identifying Values Within Text
 It will be important for the clinician to be able to type numerical values into their notes, and for the
 system to recognise these values and to associate them with the correct concept. These values are not
 modelled in SNOMED-CT, and will be derived from an external information model, but the system must
 ensure that, from the user’s point of view, the interaction appears seamless.
 It is also important that the system can derive the appropriate measurement unit, based upon the
 numbers and the concept (SNOMED-CT or non-SNOMED-CT) with which they are associated. It is
 also crucial that the system can validate the numbers, for example, to avoid decimal points in the
 wrong place, or the user entering too few digits. We would expect to employ an information model that
 contained information about the formats and ranges of the measurement types covered.
 The design will allow the user to type values into the text input area. In the example shown in Figure
 23, the user types in a temperature of ’39.8°C’. Meanwhile, the system has matched the text
 ‘Temperature’ with the SNOMED-CT observable entity concept, ‘Body temperature’. Drawing from an
 appropriate information model, the system recognises that, for the concept of ‘Body temperature’, the
 figure ’39.8’ falls within a range that would imply that this was a measurement taken in degrees
 centigrade. In its match, therefore, the system adds the unit, ‘°C’. It also inserts the temperature value
 after the SNOMED-CT match, with an equals (‘=’) sign between concept and value.




 Figure 23: Entering Text that Contains Measurement Values




                                                                                                       Page 27
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                             Microsoft



  If the user expands the encoding dialog for the match, the system presents fields in the flyout for the
  value and the value’s unit, pre-populated with ’39.8’ and ‘°C’ respectively as shown in Figure 24. If the
  user were to change the figure or the unit, this would be reflected in the suggest match label in the left
  pane and, if the user confirmed the match, in the final rendered text.




  Figure 24: Selecting the Match to Display Value and Unit Fields in the Flyout

2.3.1.1            Guidance
  The system:
        Must identify values and units from within the notes
        Should suggest default units for measurement values
        Must display the values and units it has identified back to the user for the user’s confirmation
        Should allow the user to adjust the values and units in the expanded encoding dialog

       Note
       Quantity and unit values, and their relationships with appropriate SNOMED-CT concepts, in the main, will
       require additional information model data.


2.3.1.2            How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                               Example              Comments

            Deduce the appropriate unit and display See Figure 23
             this with the value
  Table 11: How to Use the Design Guidance




                                                                                                              Page 28
                                  Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                  Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                  Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                           Microsoft




2.3.1.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                          Example                                 Comments

           Interpret a full stop character as a full   39.8 should not be interpreted by the
            stop if it has digits immediately both      system as two sentences
            sides of it.
  Table 12: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.3.1.4           Benefits and Rationale
  This approach allows users to enter values as part of their typing in notes in a narrative format. In this
  way, the entry of values should not require additional actions to the typing of the user’s text-based
  notes. However, the validation mechanism is important, and users should be warned if the values fall
  outside of recognised ranges or formats.
  User testing has shown that users understand and accept this approach.

2.3.1.5           Confidence Level

  High
        Must identify values and units from within the notes
        Must display the values and units it has identified back to the user for the user’s confirmation

  Medium
        Should allow the user to adjust the values and units in the expanded encoding dialog

2.3.2         Templates
  In addition to the system identifying values and units from with the clinician’s notes, the system should
  also encourage users to enter values in response to matching certain concepts that are associated with
  or require certain values.
  In the example shown in Figure 25 (below), the user has selected the SNOMED-CT concept match
  ‘Body temperature’ within the single concept matching approach. The system identifies that this
  concept is associated with temperature readings, and that the default unit is degrees centigrade. It
  therefore presents two fields, one for value, the other for unit (which, in this case, is set by default to
  ‘°C’). The value field has a validation process triggered upon the focus leaving the field. Failure to meet
  the validation criteria will trigger an ‘error’ message which will tell the user to change the value if they
  wish to confirm the concept. For example, if the user types in 398 (instead of 39.8), the system would
  launch an error message, inviting the user to correct the figure.




                                                                                                           Page 29
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                               Microsoft




                                                                              Fields for entering quantity
                                                                              and unit values.




Figure 25: Displaying Fields in the Flyout for Entering Measurement Values

Typing a figure into the ‘Temperature value’ field will automatically select its confirmation check box.
On the other hand, if the user selects the confirmation check box, but does not enter a value, the
system will launch a warning message when the user clicks the ‘OK’ button.
Figure 26 (below) illustrates the text parser matching approach. The system identifies the match for
‘Blood pressure’ in the clinician’s notes, and recognises it as an opportunity for the entry of values. The
system tags the expression with a yellow mark in the lower right-hand corner of the marquee.




                                                                               The system marks the
                                                                               concept matches that have
                                                                               associated values templates
                                                                               with a triangle in the corner
                                                                               of the marquee.




Figure 26: Identifying an Opportunity for Entry of Values




                                                                                                               Page 30
                                Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                      Microsoft



When the user moves the focus to the relevant expression, the system displays a floating dialog into
which the user can enter blood pressure values, as shown in Figure 27 (below). Additionally, in the
suggested match area (highlighted in yellow in the left-hand pane) the system displays a message
encouraging the user to enter values for the blood pressure reading (‘You should enter values’). At this
point, if the user wishes to enter values, they have the choice of:
      Clicking on the match label (‘Blood pressure’) and entering the values into the encoding dialog
       flyout
      Entering the values into the floating dialog in the text input area (in the right-hand pane)
      Typing the values directly into the text input area




                                                        Moving the focus to the concept
                                                        opens the template dialog, into which
                                                        the user may type in the appropriate
                                                        values.




Figure 27: Dialog Box for Entering Values

The case of ‘Blood pressure reading’ also highlights an instance of a ‘composite’ expression, where
multiple concepts are combined to form a single output unit. Real world concepts (for example, BP
120/80 mmHg) are often expressed quite differently in SNOMED-CT (in this case, as a combination of
diastolic and systolic blood pressure). Although the atomic components of these relationships are
found in SNOMED-CT, the relationships are not. Therefore, the relationships which create the
composites may need to be modelled outside of SNOMED-CT, in an external information model.




                                                                                                      Page 31
                               Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                               Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                               Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                       Microsoft



  Figure 28: Example of a Composite of Three Concepts ('Blood Pressure Reading')

2.3.2.1           Guidance
  The system:
        Should identify where matched concepts are associated with or require values
        Should encourage users to enter values where appropriate
                 Could provide fields into which users can enter these values
                 Could provide a process whereby it marks those expressions which could require values
                  and display a floating dialog when the focus moves to these expressions
        Should pre-populate the template with any values it has identified during the text parsing
         process
        Should identify elements of composites and communicate them as a single composite (in
         addition to the individual elements), such as ‘Blood pressure’
        Should be able to recognise composite values entered alongside a concept
        Should encourage users to enter in further values that comprise the composite by offering entry
         fields where appropriate

       Note
            Quantity and unit values, and their relationships with appropriate SNOMED-CT concepts, in the main, will
             require additional information model data.
            Composites do not exist in the SNOMED-CT Concept Model. Expressing these relationships requires
             metadata.


2.3.2.2           How to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                            Example                  Comments

            Offer default units                          See Figure 27

  Table 13: How to Use the Design Guidance

2.3.2.3           How Not to Use the Design Guidance
  Usage Format                                            Example                  Comments

            Offer default values                         n/a                      This could lead to the system encoding
                                                                                   values that the user had not entered
  Table 14: How Not to Use the Design Guidance

2.3.2.4           Benefits and Rationale
  Offering appropriate entry fields for composite values could assist users in their workflow. Validation of
  the measurements should help to prevent errors, and is therefore important for patient safety. The
  system should offer the flexibility to the user of either typing the values into the main notes, or adding
  the values at the point of confirming the note (that is, in the expanded encoding dialog).
  These templates have been presented to clinicians in usability tests, and clinicians have responded
  positively to them, saying that they understood what they are for and that they would be useful.

                                                                                                                       Page 32
                                   Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                   Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                   Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                             Microsoft




2.3.2.5       Confidence Level

  High
      Should identify where matched concepts are associated with or require values
      Should encourage users to enter values where appropriate
             Could provide fields into which users can enter these values

  Medium
      Could provide a process whereby it marks those expressions which could require values and
       display a floating dialog when the focus moves to these expressions




                                                                                             Page 33
                       Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                       Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                       Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                                              Microsoft




3              DOCUMENT INFORMATION

3.1            Terms and Abbreviations
    Abbreviation                        Definition
    FSN                                 Fully Specified Name

    SCT                                 Systematised Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms

    SNOMED-CT                           Systematised Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms

    UI                                  User Interface
    Table 15: Terms and Abbreviations


3.2            Definitions
    Term                                 Definition
    Context Model                        A model that specifies relationships relating to semantic context that has been defined outside of
                                         the SNOMED-CT Concept Model
    Table 16: Definitions


3.3            Nomenclature
    This section shows how to interpret the different styles used in this document to denote various types
    of information.
    All content subject to completion, agreement or verification is denoted with highlighting.

3.3.1            Body Text
    Text                                                                   Style
    Code                                                                   Monospace

    Script

    Other markup languages

    Interface dialog names                                                 Bold

    Field names

    Controls

    Folder names                                                           Title Case

    File names
    Table 17: Body Text Styles




                                                                                                                                              Page 34
                                  Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                  Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                  Last modified on 5 July 2007
                                                                                                                 Microsoft




3.3.2        Cross References
 Reference                                                        Style
 Current document – sections                                      Section number only

 Current document – figures/tables                                Caption number only

 Other project documents                                          Italics and possibly a footnote

 Publicly available documents                                     Italics with a footnote

 External Web-based content                                       Italics and a hyperlinked footnote
 Table 18: Cross Reference Styles


3.4       References
 Reference          Document                                                                           Version
 R1.                Design Guidance – Terminology – Matching                                           1.0.0.0

 R2.                Design Guidance – Terminology – Display Standards for Coded Information            1.0.0.0

 R3.                SNOMED-CT:
                        http://www.snomed.org/
 Table 19: References




                                                                                                                 Page 35
                                Design Guidance – Terminology – Elaboration
                                Prepared by Microsoft, Version 1.0.0.0
                                Last modified on 5 July 2007
