DSC Notice: 09/2010
Date of Issue: January 2010


                                                        Implementation Date:   01 December 2015
Sponsoring Organisation:
                                                        Subject:
    DH Informatics                                      Patient Banner for Clinical Systems
                                                        within the NHS in England
     Directorate
                                      DATA SET CHANGE NOTICE

This DSCN informs users of the approval of a new information standard by the Information Standards
Board for Health and Social Care (ISB). It was presented at ISB’s meeting on 24 September 2009
and subsequently approved having met the required conditions.

Summary:
This user interface standard specifies the minimum items of information that must be contained in a
patient banner, how this information should be grouped, laid out and labelled, the size of the patient
banner and where it should be located on computer screens. It applies to user interfaces displayed
on desktop or laptop computers.

Organisations developing or upgrading applications for which the standard is in scope MAY
implement the patient banner standard immediately and SHOULD do so at their next major system
release. All clinical systems within the NHS in England MUST conform to the patient banner standard
by 01 December 2015.

Patient safety risks associated with the patient banner are specified in the safety case accompanying
the standard. Organisations that develop, supply, deploy and use clinical systems must identify and
manage any risks in current systems and mitigate implementation risks for which responsibility for
mitigation has been transferred to the supplying or deploying organisation. The process for managing
safety risks is detailed in NHS information standards for the application of patient safety risk
management to the manufacture, deployment and use of health software.

The standard can also be used to inform design of user interfaces in other systems and devices
provided any safety risks are identified and managed, for example, risks related to reduced screen
size.

Other Datasets / Return Affected: None

Related DSCNs:
 DSCN 18/2009 - Application of Patient Safety Risk Management to the Deployment and Use of Health
   Software.
 DSCN 14/2009 - Application of Patient Safety Risk Management to the Manufacture of Health Software.
 AN 36/2007 - Patient Banner for Clinical Systems in the NHS in England.
 DSCN 01/2010 – Address Input and Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 03/2010 – NHS Number Input and Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 04/2010 – Patient Name Input and Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 05/2010 – Sex & Current Gender Input and Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 06/2010 – Telephone Number Input and Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 07/2010 – Date Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 08/2010 – Time Display for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England.
 DSCN 04/2009 – Patient Identifiers for Identity Bands.

Impact of Change:
Service:           Major                                  System Suppliers:    Major

The Information Standards Board for Health and Social Care (ISB) is responsible for approving information
standards.
 Further information about ISB can be found at www.isb.nhs.uk
 Data Set Change Notices can be found at www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/dscn
                                 DATA SET CHANGE NOTICE

Reference No:                    DSCN 09/2010
Version No:                      1.0
Subject:                         Patient Banner for Clinical Systems within the NHS in England
Type of Change:                  Introduction of a new approved Information Standard
Implementation Date:             01 December 2015

Business Justification:          Reducing clinical safety risks by addressing patient safety
                                 requirements for clinical systems related to the identification of
                                 patients.


 Introduction
 The patient banner is an integral part of the user interface in all systems used to support direct care
 of patients and service users. It provides key information that identifies the patient, such as name and
 date of birth, amongst others. It sits within the context of a wider clinical application, and is matched
 with the patient themselves, by asking them (or a third party, such as a parent) to confirm responses,
 usually in their presence or over the telephone. The banner is also matched with any of the patient’s
 associated artefacts, such as samples, letters, specimens, and X-rays.

 This user interface standard specifies the minimum items of information that must be contained in a
 patient banner, how this information should be grouped, laid out and labelled, the size of the patient
 banner and where it should be located on computer screens.

 The standard has been developed as part of the Common User Interface (CUI) programme within the
 Technology Office of Department of Health Informatics Directorate. This programme is addressing
 the safety risks posed by variation across the NHS in the way information is input and displayed. Its
 aim is to support healthcare IT users in correctly inputting and interpreting information relating to all
 aspects of patient care and management.

 Background
 The reduction and (where possible) elimination of errors in the identification of patients is central to
 the improvement of patient safety in the NHS. The National Patient Safety Agency (NPSA) has
 reported that when errors do occur, they are typically one of three main types:

 1.    Failure to identify the patient from their medical record
 2.    Failure to match them correctly with their artefacts (samples, letters, specimens, X-rays etc)
 3.    Failure in communication between staff, or staff not performing checking procedures correctly.

 This standard is concerned with each of the errors identified above, but particularly (1) and (2). It
 defines:

      The clinical safety risks associated with not having a common patient banner for identification.
      The minimum data set for patient identification and how and where these elements should be
       displayed on a patient banner.

 Details of the Standard
 The standard is published with associated guidance in a Common User Interface Design Guide. It is
 applicable to user interfaces displayed on desktop or laptop computers. It is assumed that, at a
 minimum, these computers are capable of operating at a minimum display resolution of 1024 x 768,
 and have a keyboard and pointing device.


DSCN 09/2010                                                                                Page 2 of 4
 The following items are covered in the guidance:
     The minimum items of information that must be contained in a patient banner in order to identify
     the patient, i.e. patient name, NHS Number and date of birth, as recommended by the NPSA.
     Grouping and layout of this information
     Labelling of information
     Location and shape of the patient banner
     Size of the patient banner.

 Aspects that are out of scope:
    Reduced-size form factors
    Display of components with separate display standards
    Input of information
    Data storage
    Display styles.

 Safety Case
 Clinical safety requirements and objectives related to the patient banner in clinical systems are
 documented in the safety case that accompanies this standard (www.isb.nhs.uk/documents/cui).
 Organisations that develop, supply, deploy and use clinical systems are required to identify and
 manage any risks in current systems until the standard can be implemented. They must also mitigate
 those live implementation risks outlined in the safety case for which responsibility for mitigation has
 been transferred to the supplying or deploying organisation.

 The process for assessing and managing safety risks is detailed in NHS information standards for the
 application of patient safety risk management to the manufacture, deployment and use of health
 software (http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/dscn/dscn2009/data-set-change/), i.e.:

   Application of Patient Safety Risk Management to the Manufacture of Health Software (DSCN
   14/2009); and
   Application of Patient Safety Risk Management to the Deployment and Use of Health Software
   (DSCN 18/2009).

 Conformance
 For full conformance to be demonstrated, the elements marked as ‘Mandatory’ in the Common User
 Interface Design Guide must be complied with and there must have been mitigation of those live
 implementation risks outlined in the safety case for which responsibility for mitigation has been
 transferred to the supplying or deploying organisation.

 Timescales for Implementation

                                         Health and Social                                         2
          FR AM EW O RK                                        Organisation         IT Suppliers
                                          Care Personnel

           Effective Date                   Immediate           Immediate            Immediate
               “may use”

        Implementation Date              When available in     At next major       At next major
               “must use”                    system           system release      system release

         Conformance Date                01 December 2015    01 December 2015   01 December 2015
“must be used effectively and assessed
               for use”

Superseded Date (of prior standard)        Not applicable      Not applicable      Not applicable
     “stop using prior standard”




DSCN 09/2010                                                                            Page 3 of 4
 Effects on Other Information Standards:
 None

 Sponsor Details
 Ken Lunn, Director of Data Standards and Products
 Department of Health Informatics Directorate
 Technology Office

 Further Information and Support
         CUI Patient Banner Design Guide - www.cui.nhs.uk
         Clinical Safety Case - www.isb.nhs.uk/documents/cui
         CUI website - www.cui.nhs.uk
         Standards documentation – www.isb.nhs.uk/documents/cui
         Queries - cuistakeholder.mailbox@nhs.net



 Appendix
 This DSCN must be read in conjunction with the Clinical Safety Case and Closure Report for
 Demographics / Information Input and Display, which can be found at the following link:
 www.isb.nhs.uk/documents/cui




 Table Notes:
         1.
                Relevant organisations are those organisations as defined in the standard who must take direct action to
                implement the standard
         2.                                                                    1
                IT Suppliers are all suppliers to the organisations listed at who supply functionality pertinent to that standard
                Effective Date is the date from which a new standard can be used but may not be mandatory. This might
         3.

                facilitate piloting, for example, or enable time for system functionality development. At this point, you “may
                use” the standard.
         4.
                Implementation Date is the point from which the new standard becomes mandatory.               Ideally, it inherently
                implies organisations use appropriate systems i.e. the date is the same for organisations and suppliers.
                However, there maybe circumstances where interim workarounds are required i.e. the date is different for
                organisations and suppliers. At this date, you “must use” the standard. Where the standard demands data
                is submitted centrally, sub components of implementation date (and possibly ‘effective date’) are:
                      5.
                           Collection Start Date – this is the date collection of data must begin
                      6.
                           First Submission Date – this is the date of first submission of data centrally
                      7.
                           Reporting Period / Submission Cycle – If the standard calls for further collection and submission at
                           defined intervals, this cell provides text of the reporting period (e.g. calendar month, financial year)
                                                                                                th
                           and the submission cycle (e.g. submit data monthly on the 10 working day of the subsequent
                           month).
         8.
                Conformance Date is the date from which the service and IT system suppliers must use the standard as
                envisaged i.e. using appropriate IT solutions rather than interim workarounds and, if the standard requires it,
                an independent, authoritative body or legitimate internal audit would conduct a conformity assessment with the
                expectation of full conformance by all relevant parties. It is the “must use standard effectively and
                assessed for use” date
         9.
                Superseded Date of the prior standard sets the date at which the prior standard is replaced by the new
                standard i.e. the prior standard must no longer be used. This date will apply only where there was a pre-
                existing standard made redundant by the new standard. It might be different from preceding dates in the
                framework if, for example, a new and old standard run in parallel for a period. It is the date from which you
                “stop using the prior standard”.




DSCN 09/2010                                                                                                       Page 4 of 4
